What’s Happening?

In prison for preaching the good news that Jesus’ death leads to eternal life, the apostle Paul pens a letter to his friends in Philippi (Philippians 1:7). He reminds them that his imprisonment is being used by God. His suffering has caused others to trust Jesus as their King and Savior (Philippians 1:12). He might be in chains, but the Gospel cannot be bound. Prison guards are hearing the good news of Jesus (Philippians 1:13). Christians, seeing the example of Paul under arrest, are boldly and fearlessly sharing the Gospel (Philippians 1:14). Though Paul is in chains and he may soon face death, he rejoices that Jesus is proclaimed (Philippians 1:18).

Prisoners in the first century were not typically provided basic necessities. They had to rely on family and friends to support them. The Philippian church, moved with compassion for their friend, sent a financial gift to provide for Paul in his need (Philippians 4:18). Paul now writes back this letter to send his heartfelt thanks. Yet he has also heard of the divisions spreading in the church he founded (Philippians 1:27, 4:2-3). He puts pen to paper, thinking of the one thing that has sustained him all these years: joy in Jesus.

Paul will soon stand trial, and he waits for that day, not with anxiety but with joy. He is convinced that Jesus will be praised by either his release or his execution (Philippians 1:20). If he is spared, he will continue to share the Gospel. If he is killed, he gets to be with Jesus (Philippians 1:21-22). Regardless of his verdict, he encourages the Philippians to stand together, united by the Gospel he has given his life to proclaim (Philippians 1:27).

Where Is the Gospel?

Paul was no stranger to imprisonment. In fact, the first time he was arrested was in Philippi several years earlier (Acts 16:23-24). When one of his jailers trusted Jesus, Paul saw firsthand how God could use a prison cell (Acts 16:25-34). And now, once again in a Roman prison, Paul looks beyond his present suffering to the ways God is working to bring people to himself. He reminds us that even as things around us seem bleak, God uses those circumstances for good (Philippians 1:12-14). Out of death and suffering, God brings life and joy (Philippians 1:18).

The good news of Jesus transformed the way Paul saw everything. Jesus shows us that our suffering leads to resurrection. Like Paul, Jesus was arrested, tried, and even executed. He willingly laid down his own life for us, becoming enchained in the prison of death. But this wasn’t the end. His imprisonment and death led to freedom and resurrection. The chains of death are forever broken, bringing us life with God. On the other side of his suffering, Jesus saw the joy that was to come. And this joy enabled him to endure the cross (Hebrews 12:2). Because Jesus suffered, we can now say, like Paul, “to live is Christ and to die is gain” (Philippians 1:21-23). Whether we live or die, Jesus will be seen as supreme. And in that, we can wholeheartedly rejoice.

See For Yourself

I pray that the Holy Spirit will open your eyes to see the God who fills us with joy in the midst of suffering. And may you see Jesus as the one who offers us life with him, even beyond our death.