What’s Happening?

Paul is about to die (2 Timothy 4:6). But he knows God will reward him for a life of faithful work (2 Timothy 4:8). As Paul ends his race, he encourages Timothy to take his baton and continue the ministry he began in hopes of Timothy’s own reward. 

He solemnly calls both God and Jesus to be his witnesses, as he charges Timothy to continue his race (2 Timothy 4:1a). To Paul, God is coming to judge and the Kingdom of Jesus is coming soon (2 Timothy 4:1b). The quick coming of God should encourage Timothy to quickly accept Paul’s charge. 

But false teachers in Ephesus deny that Jesus will come to judge at all (2 Timothy 2:18). And complacent followers of Jesus, looking for ways to justify their immoral desires, are drawn to this convenient myth (2 Timothy 4:3-4). Timothy needs to be on call immediately to correct this false teaching, despite the suffering Paul knows it will entail (2 Timothy 4:2, 5). 

In fact, Timothy should be motivated to accept this calling by the very doctrine these false teachers deny. Jesus is coming! Paul knows his race is ending and that he’s run it well (2 Timothy 4:7). And he also knows that when Jesus comes to judge, Paul will receive a reward (2 Timothy 4:8a). Paul compares this reward to a crown given to the winner of a race. But unlike the one crown athletes compete for, God awards crowns to everyone who patiently looks forward to Jesus’ coming (2 Timothy 4:8). False teachers don’t need to deny God’s coming judgment. Instead, like Timothy, they can look forward to the promise of being rewarded for a life of faithfulness. 

None of this diminishes the costliness of this message. Paul is alone. His co-workers and friends have all either abandoned the ministry or are currently deployed (2 Timothy 4:10b, 12). Paul’s former partner, Alexander, actively seeks Paul and Timothy’s harm (2 Timothy 4:14-15). And currently on trial for preaching about Jesus, Paul has no one to support him (2 Timothy 4:16). But Paul also knows God is with him in his suffering. Like the prophet Daniel was rescued from the jaws of lions and then rewarded by King Darius for his faithfulness (Daniel 6:23, 28), Paul knows God will deliver him from the maw of Rome into a heavenly Kingdom and his eternal reward (2 Timothy 4:17-18). 

Where is the Gospel?

In Jesus' first coming, he lived a hard life, was abandoned by his friends, and suffered a painful death for us (Isaiah 53:3). But Jesus’ faithfulness to God was rewarded with life from the dead (Acts 2:24). And now Jesus wears a crown and judges the world as God’s Universal Sovereign (Ephesians 1:21). But Jesus’ authority as a Judge isn’t something to fear or deny because everyone who looks forward to Jesus’ second coming will be rewarded! 

Everyone who suffers in hope of Jesus’ comfort will be given it. Everyone who works in hope of God’s approval will get it (Matthew 25:23). Everyone who throws their guilt on Jesus’ cross will be forgiven. And everyone who dies in the hope of Jesus’ empty tomb will be resurrected (John 11:25). Jesus is coming again. So like Timothy, take Paul’s last written words seriously. You too are Paul’s successor. You too have been given a race to run and a ministry to accomplish. Faithfulness will cost you but the Lord crowns all who endure in hope until he comes again.

See For Yourself

May the Holy Spirit open up your eyes to see the God who is coming again. And may you see Jesus as the one who shows us that there is always a crown and reward for those who love and hope for his return. 